The GemTools Client software executes in a client Smalltalk ([Squeak](http://www.squeak.org/) or [Pharo](http://www.pharo-project.org/)), however, it depends upon the GLASS Server software.

The first source of dependency between the client and server code is at the OmniBrowser level. When a session is logged in, a GCI connection is established to the gem (server) running under the control of a GemStone/S stoned process. When a GemTools window is opened there is OmniBrowser code that is executing on the server (GemStone vm) and Morphic code executing on the client (Smalltalk client) communicating via GCI. When you are editting code in a GemTools Browser, the classes, categories, and methods that you are manipulating exist on the server and not on the client. Only the names of categories, classes and methods are present in the client, along with object ids or OOPs of some of the necessary server-side objects.

The interaction across the wire is roughly at the level of the API between OmniBrowser and OB-Morphic, where the OmniBrowser code (like OB-Standard, i.e., the development tools) executes on the server and the OB-Morphic code executes on the client. Morphic clicks and menu picks are transmitted across the wire from the client to the OmniBrowser objects on the server, the OmniBrowser code on the server generates changed: messages that are shipped across the wire from the server to the Morphic widgets on the client, and finally the Morphic widgets make content requests ( lists or text) across the wire to which the server replies.

For the most part, window specific code is not required on the client. The System Browser, Method Implementors and Monticello Package Browser windows have no special code running on the client. On the other hand, the OTDebugger and OTInspector windows do have special code running on the client. The special code is primarily related to the unique layout requirements of those windows. As a consequence, the new OTInspector code may not function correctly with an earlier version of the client software. Conversely, as new functionality is added or moved from the client to the server more code dependencies are introduced between the client and the server

With the most recent releases, we have strived to make the GemTools code work well against a broad range of GLASS releases.